## State of Nature in Political Philosophy

4 min read | Simplest language available

I'm sure many of you have read the phenomenal piece *Lord of the Flies* by the British author William Golding before. If you never read it, here is a brief synopsis: a group of British students end up on a deserted island in the middle of the ocean due to an aircraft failure. On the island, there are no humans present, let alone any form of civilization - only a group of children in a primitive forest. In the forest, there are no school rules, no social conventions that constrain them: they could only struggle to survive, and wait for help. This book hence describes the return to the *state of nature*, which is allegorical to the original state of man - just a living individual, nothing else.

During the Age of Enlightenment, reforms of various European countries led rise to political philosophy. Further, the emergence of novel monarchies, say, in Great Britain, inspired thinkers to question the power of the monarch and the power of the people. At that time, many Enlightenment philosophers, such as Thomas Hobbes, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, John Locke, and Immanuel Kant, put forward their own ideas in regards to the power of government and the people. Not only did it destabilized the former monarchical system, it even empowered and enhanced the power of the people.

These philosophers' theories of government and institutions based on their definitions of the **state of nature**. The "state of nature" refers to the original state of people, that is, the state before the formation of government or any form of authority. This article will mainly examine the "state of nature" on the basis of the definition of three prominent Enlightenment philosophers - Hobbes, Rousseau, and Locke, respectively.

----------

### Thomas Hobbes

> In such condition there is no place for industry, because the fruit thereof is uncertain, and consequently no culture of the earth, no navigation nor the use of commodities that may be imported by sea, no commodious building, no instruments of moving and removing such things as require much force, no knowledge of the face of the earth, no account of time, no arts, no letters, no society, and which is worst of all, continual fear and danger of violent death, and the life of man, solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short. - [*Leviathan*, XIII](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leviathan_(Hobbes_book))

Above is the state of nature in which Hobbes describes in *Leviathan*, XIII. Prior to this, Hobbes also discussed his definition of the state of nature: a state where everyone has unlimited rights, and the power to do absolutely anything. Yet, due to this freedom without constraint, people will be in the best interest of their own; hence, people will fight because of their mutual interests and suspicions. In this case, everyone lives under the threat of death - "bellum omnium contra omnes" - *war of all against all*.

Hobbes, as a philosopher of the early Enlightenment period, had went through the English Civil War - the Civil War period had a great influence on his thoughts. The conflict between the "Roundheads" (Parliamentarians) and "Cavaliers" (Royalists) allowed him to see the dark side of human nature, and the people's suffering under the state of anarchy made him recognize the importance of social stability.

### John Locke

> To properly understand political power and trace its origins, we must consider the state that all people are in naturally. That is a state of perfect freedom of acting and disposing of their own possessions and persons as they think fit within the bounds of the law of nature. People in this state do not have to ask permission to act or depend on the will of others to arrange matters on their behalf. The natural state is also one of equality in which all power and jurisdiction is reciprocal and no one has more than another. It is evident that all human beings—as creatures belonging to the same species and rank and born indiscriminately with all the same natural advantages and faculties—are equal amongst themselves. They have no relationship of subordination or subjection unless God (the lord and master of them all) had clearly set one person above another and conferred on him an undoubted right to dominion and sovereignty. - [*Two Treatises On Government*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Two_Treatises_of_Government)

Locke provides his definition of the state of nature in *Two Treatises of Government*. In Locke's interpretation, he does not consider the state of nature as a state in which everyone is absolutely free; rather, Locke defines it as a state in which everyone has absolute freedom, but are simulataneously subject to the laws of God and nature. In his theory, the state of nature seems to exist in people's rationality from the very beginning, and everyone possesses the right to implement the laws of nature:
> The state of nature has a law of nature to govern it, which obliges every one: and reason, which is that law, teaches all mankind, who will but consult it, that... no one ought to harm another in his life, health, liberty, or possessions[.]

However, as Locke mentions in his own work, it seems unreasonable for one to "authoritatively pronounce justice and administer punishment for breaches of the natural law" for oneself, as one must be biased to a certain extent. For this, Locke put forward his consequent interpretation of government, in which I shall attempt to paraphrase here: the major role of the government is to exercise the laws of nature; yet, as the **monarch is also a human being with desires, but the authority of the monarchy coerces the people to abide to the natural laws. In the state of nature, everyone may resist against an illegal decision**.

### Jean-Jacques Rousseau
> There is another principle which has escaped Hobbes; which, having been bestowed on mankind, to moderate, on certain occasions, the impetuosity of egoism, or, before its birth, the desire of self-preservation, tempers the ardour with which he pursues his own welfare, by an innate repugnance at seeing a fellow-creature suffer. - [*Discourse on the Origin and Basis of Inequality Among Men*, I](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discourse_on_Inequality)

In Rousseau's theory, the existence of civil society corrupts people's hearts; while in the state of nature, people are only constrained by the laws of nature - people protect themselves. The original society is family: children requires their parents' care, but when this demand decreases or even disappears, this parent-child relationship shall end - the children are independent, consequent contact would require contract. During this process, people realize that the means to protect themselves manifests them becoming their own masters.

Unlike Hobbes and Locke, Rousseau believes there is "amour de soi même" (*love of self*) and a "natural repugnance" to suffering - that is to say, a natural pity or compassion. This compassion hence motivates humans under the state of nature to act only for his/her own sake and to avoid conflicts with other animals (and humans). Moreover, **in order to safeguard their own desires, humans cooperate naturally, as mutual interests will lead people to engage in collective activities**. Meanwhile, as the human society develops; and as language, finance and property, science and technology are born, negative factors such as jealousy, arrogance, and thus, sins, will also eventually emerge.
